# Biennial_Survey_2023
Contains the files for using an R Shiny application that allows for data exploration of the FDLP's Biennial Survey COVID-19 related questions from 2021 and 2023.


### Getting Started

The included R file is an R Shiny application developed to enable flexible and comprehensive data exploration of the Biennial Survey COVID-19 data from 2021 and 2023. It allows users to upload the survey data directly into the application environment, apply a variety of filters to the data, and then save a copy of the filtered data as a .csv file, if desired. To use the application, two different files must first be downloaded. The first file, Biennial_Survey_App.R, is the R code for the application itself. The second file, “DLC-COVID19WG-2023-biennial-survey-q4-2024.xlsx,” is the Excel file containing the Biennial Survey COVID-19 data from 2021 and 2023.

Additionally, the latest version of R is required to run the application. To install the latest version of R, version 4.4.1, please visit https://cran.r-project.org/ and select the appropriate download for your operating system. You may also wish to download RStudio, which is a popular coding environment for R. It was used in the development of this application, and it can make reading and running applications, including this one, easier. To learn more, or to download the latest version of RStudio, please visit https://posit.co/downloads/.

### Running the Application

To run the application, open the Biennial_Survey_App.R file in your R environment. Then, highlight the full text of the file. You can do this by selecting Ctrl + A for Windows computers or Command + A for Mac devices. Next, run the entire code at once. You can do this by selecting the Run/Run App button on the tool bar. If you are using RStudio, a new RStudio window will open with the application. (Note: You may have to maximize the new RStudio window.) If you are not using RStudio, a new window in your device’s default browser will open with the application. Regardless, you will be directed to a page that contains three tabs along the upper left corner.

### Uploading the Survey Data

The first, and default, tab reads “Import Data.” This is where you will upload the Excel file containing the survey data. Upon selecting the dark gray “Upload…” button, you will be prompted to select this Excel file from your device’s file explorer. Once you have selected the appropriate Excel file, you will see a blue loading bar beneath the “Upload…” button. Once the loading bar is full and reads “Upload complete”, the survey data has been successfully loaded into the application environment. (Note: If you load any file other than the one included, the application will not run correctly.)

### Using the Application

After loading the survey data into the application environment, select the second tab from the upper left corner, which reads “Explore Survey Data.” Here, you will see an interactive table that displays all of the data from the 2021 and 2023 Biennial Survey COVID-19 questions. The light gray panel on the left side of the table allows you to filter the entries that are displayed based on a variety of features. You can filter the data by survey year, CRDP participant status, depository type, library size, library type, NCSA, state, partnership agreement status, and whether a library participated in both the 2021 and 2023 surveys with this panel. By default, all survey entries are displayed until otherwise filtered. 

To select the filters from the filter panel, click on the search bar beneath the feature you are interested in. You may then either type in a filter value, or select it from the dropdown list. You are able to select multiple filters for one feature. After you have selected all of the filters you are interested in, navigate to the bottom of the filter panel and click the “Apply Filters” button. The table will automatically update, showing only the survey responses that meet all of the filter criteria selected. To filter by survey question response, scroll over to the desired column and enter an ‘X’ into the search bar for all surveys that indicated a “Yes” for that question. (Note: All of the filters are interdependent. For example, if you only select the “Northeast” option under the NCSA feature and “CA” under the State feature, no survey responses would appear, as California is not located in the northeast region of the country.)

It is possible that when applying filters, you may select a combination of filters that the data cannot support. Should you encounter a blank survey response table, it means that there are no survey responses that match all the filters you have selected. When this occurs, reset the filters by clearing any question response filters that use an ‘X’ if this is what triggered the blank table. Otherwise, if you have only selected filters from the filter panel, click the “Apply Filters” button at the bottom of the panel again. This will reset the entire table. To reset individual filters, select the appropriate feature search bar and use the Backspace key to clear the search bar, then click the “Apply Filters” button.

### Saving a Copy of the Filtered Data

If at any point you wish to save a copy of the filtered survey responses, select the third tab from the upper left corner, which reads “Download Data.” This tab contains a single button that will allow you to download the filtered survey responses as a .csv file. If you are using RStudio, a window with your file explorer will appear, allowing you to save the .csv file to your desired destination. The default name of the file will be filtered_survey_data.csv, but you may rename it at this stage, if desired. If you are not using RStudio, and are running the application in your device’s web browser, the .csv file will be saved automatically to your downloads folder with the default name listed above.

### Closing the Application

After downloading the filtered survey responses, you can either close the application, or return to the “Explore Survey Data” tab and continue using the application. There is no limit to the number of times you can apply various filters to the survey data and download a copy of the results in one session. Additionally, there is no time limit for how long the application will run before closing. If you are using RStudio, you can close out of the application by closing the window it is running in, and then closing out of the R file itself. If you are not using RStudio, you can close out of the application by closing the browser tab it is running in, then by closing the R file itself. From there, you may need to click the red, stop-sign icon on the console tool bar to terminate the connection to your browser completely, then exit out of the console window.
